Maven for Java / SpringBoot:-
Maven is a build automation and dependency management tool primarily used for Java projects. It simplifies the process of managing project dependencies, building, and deploying applications by providing a standardized project structure and a declarative approach to configuration through an XML file called pom.xml (Project Object Model).

Key Features of Maven:
1. Dependency Management: Maven allows developers to easily manage project dependencies by specifying them in the pom.xml file. It automatically downloads and resolves dependencies from remote repositories.
2. Build Automation: Maven provides a consistent build process through predefined lifecycles (e.g., clean, compile, test, package, install, deploy) and plugins that can be configured in the pom.xml file.
3. Project Structure: Maven enforces a standard directory layout for projects, making it easier for developers to understand and navigate the codebase.
4. Plugins: Maven has a rich ecosystem of plugins that extend its functionality, allowing developers to perform tasks such as code compilation, testing, packaging, and deployment.
5. Repository Management: Maven uses repositories (local, central, and remote) to store and retrieve project dependencies and plugins.
6. Multi-Module Projects: Maven supports the creation of multi-module projects, allowing developers to manage related projects within a single build.
7. Integration: Maven integrates seamlessly with popular IDEs (e.g., Eclipse, IntelliJ IDEA) and continuous integration tools (e.g., Jenkins, Travis CI).
8. Convention over Configuration: Maven follows the principle of "convention over configuration," reducing the need for extensive configuration by adhering to standard practices.
Maven Project Object Model (POM):
Parent POM:- 
  - A parent POM is a special type of POM that serves as a base configuration for multiple child projects. It allows you to define common settings, dependencies, plugins, and properties that can be inherited by child projects, promoting consistency and reducing duplication across related projects.
  
  - By using a parent POM, you can centralize the management of shared configurations, making it easier to maintain and update them in one place. Child projects can inherit from the parent POM by specifying the parent element in their own pom.xml files.
  
  - Parent POMs are commonly used in multi-module projects or when managing a group of related projects within an organization. They help enforce best practices and ensure that all child projects adhere to the same standards and configurations.
  
  - Example of a parent POM declaration in a child project's pom.xml:
    ```xml
    <parent>
        <groupId>com.example</groupId>
        <artifactId>parent-project</artifactId>
        <version>1.0.0</version>
    </parent>
    ```

POM.xml Structure:
1. Project Coordinates: groupId, artifactId, version
2. Dependencies: List of external libraries required by the project
3. Build: Configuration for the build process, including plugins and resources
4. Repositories: Locations to download dependencies from
5. Properties: Custom properties that can be used throughout the POM


Common Maven Commands:
1. mvn clean: Cleans the project by deleting the target directory.
2. mvn compile: Compiles the source code of the project.
3. mvn test: Runs the unit tests of the project.
4. mvn package: Packages the compiled code into a distributable format (e.g., JAR, WAR).
5. mvn install: Installs the packaged code into the local Maven repository.
6. mvn deploy: Deploys the packaged code to a remote repository for sharing with other developers.

merged use:- to perform multiple phases in a single command
  mvn clean compile test package install deploy
  mvn clean compile test package


Maven Repositories:
1. Local Repository: A local cache on the developer's machine where Maven stores downloaded dependencies and plugins.
2. Central Repository: A public repository maintained by the Maven community that hosts a vast collection of open-source libraries and plugins.
3. Remote Repositories: Custom repositories hosted by organizations or third parties to share proprietary or specialized libraries.

Maven Wrapper:
  - The Maven Wrapper (mvnw) is a script that allows you to run Maven commands without requiring users to have Maven installed on their machines. It ensures that the project is built with a specific version of Maven, providing consistency across different development environments.
  
  - The Maven Wrapper consists of two main files: mvnw (for Unix-based systems) and mvnw.cmd (for Windows). These scripts download and install the specified version of Maven if it is not already present on the system, and then execute the Maven commands.
  
  - To set up the Maven Wrapper in your project, you can use the following command:
    ```
    mvn -N io.takari:maven:wrapper
    ```
  
  - Once set up, developers can use the wrapper scripts to run Maven commands, for example:
    ```
    ./mvnw clean install   # On Unix-based systems
    mvnw.cmd clean install # On Windows
    ```
  
  - The Maven Wrapper is particularly useful in CI/CD pipelines and collaborative projects, as it eliminates discrepancies caused by different Maven versions among team members.